In this video and the next ones,
we are going to implement a user-friendly
password reset functionality, which is kind of
standard in most web applications.
And probably, you have used the password reset
on some website before and usually,
it works like this.
You just have to provide your email address
and you will then get an email with a link
where you can click and then that's gonna take you
to a page where you can put in a new password.
This is a very standard procedure and so
this is also how we're going to implement it
here in this application.
Basically there are two steps.
For the first one is that the user sends a post request
to a forgot password route, only with this email address.
This will then create a reset token
and sent that to the email address that was provided.
Just a simple, random token, not a JSON Web Token.
That's a difference here.
Then in the second part, which is gonna be the next video,
the user then sends that token from his email
along with a new password in order to update his password.
Basically, we will have exports dot forgot password
which is the first step.
So request, response and next
and then as a second step, we have reset password.
Then let's also go ahead and implement these two routes.
Okay, and that's, of course, in their user router
or user routes file.
Let's put them also right up here
and actually I can just duplicate these lines here.
So we have again forgot password,
which will only receive the email address
and then reset password,
which will receive the token as well as the new password.
This is the one that we're gonna start
implementing in this lecture.
Let's just like before specify our steps here.
So first, get user
based on posted email
then generate the random token.
And then basically send it back as an email.
This stuff is pretty common for us at this point.
So user, so let's await user dot find
and now it's find one,
not find by id because we don't know the user's id.
And user, of course, also doesn't know his own id
and so we specified the email address.
Basically it's the only piece of data that is known.
And that is stand on request dot body dot email address.
And of course now we need to say that
we're in an async function and then just like before,
let's wrap it in catch async.
Give it a save and the error should be gone.
Then next step, let's verify
if the user does exist.
So if no user, then return to the next middleware
along of course with a new error.
Is no user with that email address.
And then we can put a 404, which as you already know,
means not found.
Next up, let's then generate the random token
and for that, once more, we're actually gonna create
an instant method on the user.
Because once more, this really has to do with
the user data itself.
And we're gonna write a bit of code really,
and so, if it was only one line of code,
then of course we could just put it right here.
But we need a couple of lines of code
and so again, it's a bit cleaner
to separate it into its own function.
And that usually with Mongoose is best as an instant method.
So down here, let's just edit here at the end.
So user schema dot methods dot create password reset token.
Quite a long and descriptive name.
I like to do it like that,
so that I know exactly what I'm dealing with.
The password reset token should basically be a random string
but at the same time, it doesn't need
to be as cryptographically strong as the password hash
that we created before.
We can just use the very simple, random bytes function
from the built-in crypto module.
Let's go ahead and actually add that.
Crypto require and again, it is a built-in a node module
so no need to install anything.
Cool.
Now, let's then actually generate our token.
And for that, we use crypto dot random bytes
and then here we need to specify the number of
characters basically.
And then we also in the end,
convert it to a hexadecimal string.
Two string
and then we can specify the hex option here.
Now if you're wondering why we are
actually creating this token,
I guess I didn't really explain it just yet.
Basically this token is what we're gonna send
to the user and so it's like a reset password really
that the user can then use to create a new real password.
And of course, only the user will have access to this token.
And so in fact, it really behaves kind of like a password.
Since essentially it is just a password,
it means that if a hacker can get access to our database,
well then that's gonna allow the hacker to gain access
to the account by setting a new password.
If we would just simply store this reset token
in our database now, then if some attacker gains access
to the database, they could then use
that token and create a new password using that token
instead of you doing it.
They would then effectively control your account
Just like a password, we should never store
a plain reset token in the database.
Let's actually encrypt it,
but such as before with the password,
it doesn't need such a cryptographically strong
encryption method.
Because these reset tokens are a way less dangerous
attack vector.
Again, we're just gonna use the built-in
crypto module.
It works in this kind of weird-looking way.
We say crypto then create hash
with the sha 256 algorithm
then we need to say update
and then variable where the token is stored.
Whatever string we want to encrypt basically.
And then we need to say digest and then again
store it as a hexadecimal.
And now where are we actually gonna save this reset token?
Well, we're gonna create a new field in our database schema.
'Cause of course, we want to save it in the database,
so that we can then compare it
with the token that the user provides.
Let's do that here at the end.
Password reset token,
that's the string.
And then also password reset expires.
Because this reset will actually expire
after a certain amount of time as a security measure.
You will only have 10 minutes in order to actually
reset your password.
Let's now go ahead and use these.
This dot password reset token is then equal
to this encryption.
Next up, let's then set password reset expires
and let's set that to date dot now
and then simply add a couple of seconds to that.
We want it to work for 10 minutes
and so that's 10 and then we need it in milliseconds.
Times 60 for seconds and then times 1000 for milliseconds.
And then I also want to return the plain text token
because that's actually the one that we're gonna send
through the email.
Return reset token.
We need to send via email
the unencrypted reset token because otherwise
it wouldn't make much sense to encrypt it at all.
If the token that was in the database
was the exact same that we could use
to actually change the password,
well then that wouldn't be any encryption at all.
We sent one token via email
and then we have the encrypted version in our database.
And that encrypted one is then basically useless
to change the password.
It's just like when we're saving only the
encrypted password itself to the database,
just like we did up here,
So where we encrypted the password using bcrypt.
Keep in mind that the only ever save
sensitive data in an encrypted form
and then compare it with the encrypted version
that's in the database.
That's just log these two to the console
that will make our lives a bit easier down the road.
Let's say reset token
and I'm logging in here
as an object because this way, it will then actually
tell me the variable name along with its value.
And then the same with this dot password reset token.
This one doesn't really work
with writing object, this new ES6 way
and let's just leave it at this.
Anyway, let's just come back here
and then use that function.
So remember how we returned the reset token,
and let's store that here.
So reset token is equal to user dot set
and I'm not sure of the name anymore.
Create password reset token,
so that's a long one.
All right and so that is done,
but actually what we did was just to modify
the data in here.
When we set this dot password expires for example
to this value, we did in fact
not really update the document.
We did not save it.
We really just modify it,
but now we then need to save it.
Let's say await user dot save.
But watch what happens as we now use this.
Let's just grab this one here.
This is the route that we did find before.
And now we get this route is not yet defined.
Let's see why that is.
In the user route, we clearly have the same url here,
but I see that we actually need to do a post request.
All right, okay, but now we get an error
saying please provide email and password.
And so that's what I meant when I said
watch what happens when you try this.
That happens because we're trying to save a document,
but we do not specify all of the mandatory data,
so the fields that we marked as required.
Let's quickly fix that.
All we need to do is to actually pass a special option
into this user dot save method.
We say
validate before save
set to false.
This will then deactivate all the validaters
that we specified in our schema.
It's these small things that you need to know
that will make all the difference.
Now I also didn't actually know that this existed
because no one really knows all of the stuff.
It's impossible.
A library like Mongoose is simply way too big
for you to know everything there is.
I went ahead and read the Mongoose documentation
and so that's where I found this extremely helpful option.
All of this just to say that again,
no one knows everything
and so it's really a good habit to
if you run into some problems
to take a look at the documentation
for the library that you're using.
Let's take a look at this now.
And we still get the same error here,
but I see down here that it's actually
coming from the login function.
Let's take a look at what's going on here.
Let's take a look at the routes also.
Ah, okay, so here's the problem.
We are now trying to call
the login handler, which of course, doesn't make sense.
Here it's forgot password.
Here it's reset password.
And so the error that we got before was actually not because
of the validation.
Let's send this again
and now we get the error that there is no user
with this email address
and so that's because we didn't specify
any email address in the body.
We tested that
and so now it's time to actually test it
with a user email.
All right.
And so now it shouldn't actually do anything
because we're not sending back any response.
Let's just cancel this
because all I was really interested in
is to see these tokens here
and then also to take a look at the user object.
This here is the original reset token,
so you see it's a random hexadecimal string
and then we got the encrypted one in here.
This remember is the one that should not be in the database,
so ending in a901.
Let's take a look at that.
And indeed, here it is,
password reset token ending in this a901.
And also the date, which is in fact 10 minutes from now.
Now you know at what time I'm recording this video.
Anyway, but this worked just fine.
And so this is actually the first part
of creating this password reset functionality.
In the next video, we will then
send this token here via email to the user
and so actually prepared a separate video
only for learning how to actually send email with
node to js.
That's a very fun one
so don't wait to move there right away.